---
date: 2026-05-01
objectives: 
    - understand the basic implementation for core LLM powered funcitonalities
    - condense the knowledge about ai architectures
---

### Main tasks
    - Read [Philosophy of LangChain](https://docs.langchain.com/oss/python/langchain/philosophy) tooling and core components
    - Skim through OpenAI cookbook to get familiar with code snippets on different techniques


### Journal
After today's reading I feel more confident in being able to not just detect what LLM solutions can look like in a real environment, but also, to design a high level draft of what such system could be. Before I thought LLM powered apps were something different, probably a bit far from what a 'traditional' app looks like, and I a way, it's true. The focus is not mutating data based on business rules, but instead, to have control over a flow of data that in a lot of cases is too unstructured to be controlled with just code. 

However, that same distinction makes building these app challenging in a separate way. It's not just building services that take an input, process data and generate an output. The 'process' step is in a way taken over by the AI, and what happens befor the input reaches the 'process' and what/how the results are output has to encode all business requirements in a safe way. I like that frameworks like LangChain are specifically designed for this perspective of controlling flow, and help a lot in abstracting away the burden of the low level api calls.

As Chip Huyen's blog post says, it's easy to make something cool with LLMs, but not that easy to have a production ready app. That just reminds me of the lot of memes going around about companies pushing helpdesk bot features, marketing them as the big next thing, and in the end people just hacking their way through prompts to do something that's supposedly not their goal, like McDonald's bot being asked about Python and it solving the problem and then prompting the user to buy a McNugget.

The challenges here are not only technical: being able to properly use tools like the LangChain components, understanding quirks of models and so on. There's a lot of non-technical problems I can see adding complexity:
    - Communication with stakeholders: Non-technical people will not be aware of the quirks and gotchas of working with LLMs. And the great UX they might have with tools like ChatGPT might blind them from the real issues their business might face if an AI feature goes sideways.
    - Difficult of testing: Not just techincally, but in general, having reported issues that are very hard to reproduce, being able to keep consistency in the outputs, etc.
    - Expectations: People might have overly high expectations of what an LLM powered app can do, and how it should look like. It's likely that reaching some peak performance and consistency will always take longer than expected.

Anyways, in general, I know feel safe talking about LLM powered apps. I think that when building AI features, it's essential to recognize the distinctions vs rule based software, communicate the challenges clearly, and build with a focus on orchestration, control and evaluation.

