---
date: 2026-04-22
objectives: 
    - build a mental map of knowns, gaps, and unknowns
---

### Main tasks
    - Read through ai-generated summaries
    - Detect topics with least knowledge/more questions to focus on later
    - Explore ai provided sources on less known topics


### Journal
Original perception of AI integration techniques was overall accurate though with some details: After no-AI, the simplest systems are prompt based, single turn, bound to provided context. Most prone to hallucinate, most 'unstructured'. 

Then, tool calling and RAG techniques are the next step in complexity, but also in controlling context and behavior under more structured constraints: the LLM can do what the tools allow, and/or the LLM will use what the RAG returns. 

Seems the authors tend to layer tool calling over RAG in terms of complexity, as if, in an evolutionary sense, RAG comes first, and then tool calling evolves as a next step. To me, it feels like they're equally relevant techniques for two diverging purposes: Provide more accurate context (all RAG flavors are variations that specialize in optimizing for a specific purpose) and make the AI an active piece of the systems it works with ('an model is as good as the tools you give it').

It's interesting to see that there are LOTS of specialized techniques in each layer of these AI-systems integration: prompt engineering caveats and opinionated techniques, several mainstream RAG flavors, and the ability to create whatever tool its relevant for a context and make it available to the LLM for execution. It feels overwhelming at first, and I think is a domain where the generalistic approach to learning works best: knowing what's out there, pick a couple things to dig into, and be open to change.

Finally, the topmost layer of complexity are the so called agent loops. Personally, it feels this is where the most promising use cases appear, but where there's the least standardization on, and where it gets really easy to get lost in. Topics get mixed around: Agentic RAG is an interesting one: it's a RAG technique, but it loops over using tools to increase the accuracy of the retrieved context. 

I find super relevant that the higher we climb on these complexity layers, the less deterministic the systems are, the more relevant orchestration becomes (against 'correctness' of the code) and the system reliability paradigm changes towards guardrails and oversight.

